
It is the last great stretch of nothingness in the United States, a vast landscape of mosses, sedges and shrubs that is home to migrating caribou and the winter dens of polar bears.

Aside from a Native village at its northern tip, civilization has not dented its 19 million acres, an area the size of South Carolina. There are no roads and no visitors beyond the occasional hunter and backpacker.

But the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge — a federally protected place of austere beauty that during a recent flyover was painted white by heavy snowfall — is on the cusp of major change.

The biggest untapped onshore trove of oil in North America is believed to lie beneath the refuge’s coastal plain along the Beaufort Sea. For more than a generation, opposition to drilling has left the refuge largely unscathed, but now the Trump administration, working with Republicans in Congress and an influential and wealthy Alaska Native corporation, is clearing the way for oil exploration along the coast.

Decades of protections are unwinding with extraordinary speed as Republicans move to lock in drilling opportunities before the 2020 presidential election, according to interviews with over three dozen people and a review of internal government deliberations and federal documents.

To that end, the Trump administration is on pace to finish an environmental impact assessment in half the usual time. An even shorter evaluation of the consequences of seismic testing is nearing completion. Within months, trucks weighing up to 90,000 pounds could be conducting the tests across the tundra as they try to pinpoint oil reserves.

While actual oil production would be a decade or more away, the turnaround represents a prized breakthrough in the Trump administration’s campaign to exploit fossil fuels and erase restrictive policies protecting the environment and addressing global warming.

The Interior Department, which has jurisdiction over the Arctic refuge, has been central to the administration’s regulatory rollback in Alaska and beyond, accommodating the wishes of big businesses to strip down rules on how federal lands can be used. The oil and gas industry has been among the biggest beneficiaries as the administration has relaxed or abandoned regulations meant to safeguard air quality, groundwater supplies and wildlife.

The fate of the refuge’s coastal plain is in the hands of Ryan Zinke, the Interior secretary, who has appointed top deputies with deep professional and political ties to Alaska to oversee its development. In 2014, two of the appointees were involved in an unsuccessful court challenge to Obama-era policies that had helped keep the area off limits.

Congressional approval to open the area to oil exploration was inserted in tax overhaul legislation last December under the guise of generating revenue for the federal government, and by next year, the Interior Department expects to begin selling the first drilling leases.

The hurried timeline has created friction, with some specialists in the federal government concerned that environmental risks are being downplayed or ignored. And many outside scientists and environmentalists share the concerns, warning that plans for seismic testing and eventual drilling could harass, injure or kill polar bears and other wildlife.

“It seems as though the administration is in a headlong rush to put the drill bit into the coastal plain,” said David J. Hayes, a deputy Interior secretary in the Obama and Clinton administrations. “Given the virgin territory of the refuge, with the unique wildlife dependency issues, I don’t know how you do this in an artificially fast and truncated fashion.”

Mr. Zinke’s Alaska-friendly appointees, who have long pushed for oil exploration in the coastal plain, say the fears are overstated. They point out that years ago, Congress left open the eventual possibility of allowing development there. Exploration is in the best interest of Alaskans, they say.

“I feel like there is a lot of expectations, hopes and dreams from people who I know and love that are riding on this,” said Joe Balash, one of the appointees, who has worked in Alaskan political circles for two decades and now oversees the Bureau of Land Management.

Sign Up for On Politics With Lisa Lerer
A spotlight on the people reshaping our politics. A conversation with voters across the country. And a guiding hand through the endless news cycle, telling you what you really need to know.

An Alaska Native company, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, has been a major force behind the push and stands to enjoy a windfall if drilling proceeds. The corporation, which has been awarded more than $7.5 billion in federal contracts in the past 10 years, expanded its lobbying under the Trump administration, records show, and Mr. Zinke appointed one of its executives to a top post.

Students and instructors at the Fairbanks Pipeline Training Center, whose conditions are meant to simulate the working environment of the North Slope oil fields.

Students and instructors at the Fairbanks Pipeline Training Center, whose conditions are meant to simulate the working environment of the North Slope oil fields.CreditBrian Adams for The New York Times
Known as A.S.R.C., it is among 13 regional businesses created in the 1970s to foster economic development among Alaska’s indigenous population. It has myriad financial interests in the state’s oil-rich North Slope region, which includes the refuge’s coastal plain and Prudhoe Bay, home to one of the largest oil fields in North America. And it has been a key financial backer of Senator Lisa Murkowski, the Alaska Republican, who has been the drilling plan’s biggest champion in Congress.

Many Natives on the North Slope — including Inupiat who live in Kaktovik, the village inside the refuge — support oil development. But another group that lives south of the refuge, the Gwich’in, fears oil development would disturb the migration of porcupine caribou, animals it has hunted for centuries and still relies on for much of its food.

A nationwide poll last year by researchers at Yale and George Mason Universities showed that 70 percent of registered voters in the United States opposed drilling in the reserve.

Ms. Murkowski declined to comment, as did Alaska’s other elected representatives in Washington. Mr. Zinke also declined to comment. But he told a Senate committee in March that he was “very bullish on the Arctic.”

A History of Frustration
The struggle over oil exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge has its roots 50 years ago in the discovery of petroleum reserves around Prudhoe Bay, west of the refuge.

Congress in 1960 had set aside millions of acres in northeast Alaska for wildlife, lands that were largely off the beaten path, geographically and politically, and included the refuge’s coastal plain.

But with the Prudhoe Bay discovery in 1968, the calculus changed. Many thought the plain might hold riches too.

In 1980, when Congress voted to conserve much of the federal land in Alaska, drilling advocates pushed for oil and gas development on the coastal plain. Then, as now, the move was supported by many Alaskans, who generally favor oil development, in part because some of the revenue is returned to them in the form of an annual dividend. Drilling has largely had bipartisan support among Alaskan lawmakers as well.

Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, whose deputies have ties to Alaskan industry, and Senator Lisa Murkowski, a Republican from the state who has championed drilling.

Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, whose deputies have ties to Alaskan industry, and Senator Lisa Murkowski, a Republican from the state who has championed drilling.CreditMolly Riley/Associated Press
The advocates were unsuccessful but had an opening: The 1980 bill allowed Congress to authorize oil and gas development at a later date. The 1.5-million-acre coastal plain, identified in Section 1002 of the legislation, has been known since as the 1002 Area.

In 1995, with Republicans controlling both houses of Congress for the first time in decades, legislation was approved to allow development. But Democrats opposed the measure and President Bill Clinton vetoed it.

When Republicans held on to Congress in the 2016 elections and President Trump won the White House, drilling proponents saw another opening.

Ms. Murkowski told reporters within hours of Mr. Trump’s victory that she would renew the push for legislation. That set in motion a furious effort to win congressional approval and position the Interior Department to carry a plan forward.

Congress Takes Action
A flight from Alaska’s central Arctic coast to Fairbanks is a straight shot. But when Mr. Zinke and Ms. Murkowski flew the route in May last year, just a few months into the Interior secretary’s tenure, the pilot made a wide detour to the east.

Below them was the vast 1002 Area, extending between the Brooks Range and the Beaufort Sea, still off limits to oil and gas exploration but now within their political sights.

A few days later in Anchorage, Ms. Murkowski introduced Mr. Zinke at an oil and gas conference. “The only path for energy dominance is a path through the great state of Alaska,” Mr. Zinke told the group.